Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: regional circulations:
the coronary and splanchnic beds. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is meant by a regional or special circulation,
and which ones will we consider today?
A regional or special circulation is the blood supply to a particular organ or
vascular bed whose anatomy and control are specialised to meet that organ's
particular needs, so that, although every bed obeys the same basic haemodynamic
principles, each has distinctive features of flow, regulation and vulnerability.
The body's cardiac output is distributed among these beds in parallel,
and several of them depart markedly from the general pattern: the coronary,
cerebral, renal, splanchnic, pulmonary, skeletal-muscle,
cutaneous and uteroplacental circulations each have their own characteristic
behaviour.
What makes a circulation special is some combination of a particular pattern of
blood flow, a particular balance between intrinsic autoregulation and extrinsic
neural and humoral control, a particular relationship between oxygen supply and
demand, and a particular susceptibility to ischaemia.
Today we shall concentrate on two of the most important and most clinically
demanding for the anaesthetist — the coronary circulation,
which supplies the heart, and the splanchnic circulation, which supplies the gut,
liver and abdominal viscera — the cerebral and renal circulations having been
considered with the nervous system and the kidney.
Both the coronary and the splanchnic beds illustrate the principles vividly and are
central to anaesthetic management.
So a regional circulation is an organ's specialised blood supply,
distinctive in its flow pattern, regulation and vulnerability,
and we shall examine the coronary and splanchnic beds in particular as the two of
greatest relevance here.
Describe the anatomy of the coronary circulation.
The coronary circulation supplies the heart itself,
and its anatomy determines both the pattern of normal flow and the distribution of
damage in disease.
The arterial supply arises from the two coronary arteries that originate from the
aortic sinuses just above the aortic valve,
so that the heart is the first organ perfused from the aorta.
The left coronary artery arises from the left sinus and, after a short main stem,
divides into the left anterior descending artery,
which runs in the anterior interventricular groove to supply the front of the left
ventricle and most of the interventricular septum, and the circumflex artery,
which passes round to the lateral and posterior left ventricle.
The right coronary artery arises from the right sinus,
runs in the right atrioventricular groove, and supplies the right ventricle,
the inferior left ventricle in most people, and, importantly,
the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes in the majority,
which is why right coronary disease causes bradyarrhythmias.
Which artery supplies the inferior and posterior heart defines dominance.
The venous drainage is mostly through the coronary sinus into the right atrium,
with some small veins draining directly into the chambers.
A crucial anatomical point is that the vessels penetrate from the surface inward,
so the subendocardium, the innermost layer,
is supplied by the most distal vessels and is the most vulnerable to ischaemia.
So the coronary anatomy is the left and right coronary arteries arising from the
aortic sinuses, supplying defined territories including the conducting nodes from
the right, draining through the coronary sinus,
with the subendocardium the watershed most at risk.
What is distinctive about the pattern and magnitude of coronary blood flow?
Coronary blood flow has two highly distinctive features — its high magnitude
relative to the organ's mass, and its phasic variation through the cardiac cycle —
both of which follow from the heart's unique position as a pump perfusing itself.
In magnitude, the heart receives about four to five per cent of the resting cardiac
output, some two hundred and fifty millilitres per minute,
despite being only about half a per cent of body weight; per gram,
this is one of the highest tissue blood flows in the body,
reflecting the heart's continuous, high oxygen demand.
The truly distinctive feature, however, is the phasic pattern.
In most organs blood flows mainly during systole,
when arterial pressure is highest; in the left ventricle the reverse is true.
During systole, the contracting myocardium compresses the intramural coronary
vessels so forcefully that flow to the left ventricle is throttled,
falling to a low level or even briefly reversing in the subendocardium;
the bulk of left ventricular coronary flow therefore occurs during diastole,
when the muscle relaxes and the vessels are no longer compressed.
This subjugation of flow to the cardiac cycle is most marked in the subendocardium,
which is squeezed hardest. The right ventricle,
being thinner and developing lower pressure,
has less systolic impedance and flows more evenly.
So coronary flow is high per gram and, for the left ventricle,
predominantly diastolic, because systolic compression of the intramural vessels
throttles flow during contraction — a fact of central clinical importance.
Given that, what determines coronary perfusion pressure?
Because left ventricular coronary flow occurs chiefly in diastole and is opposed by
the pressure within the ventricular wall,
the effective coronary perfusion pressure for the vulnerable subendocardium is not
simply the mean arterial pressure but the difference between the aortic pressure
during diastole and the pressure inside the ventricle that opposes flow.
For the left ventricular subendocardium,
the perfusing pressure is therefore approximately the aortic diastolic pressure
minus the left ventricular end-diastolic pressure,
since flow happens in diastole and the chamber pressure during diastole opposes
subendocardial perfusion.
This simple relationship has profound clinical consequences.
Anything that lowers aortic diastolic pressure — systemic hypotension,
vasodilatation, aortic regurgitation — reduces coronary perfusion.
Anything that raises ventricular end-diastolic pressure — a failing,
dilated or stiff ventricle, or excessive filling — also reduces the net perfusing
pressure to the subendocardium.
And because flow is diastolic, the duration of diastole matters:
tachycardia shortens diastole disproportionately,
cutting the time available for coronary filling just when, by raising rate,
it also increases oxygen demand.
This is why tachycardia is so dangerous in the ischaemic heart,
attacking supply and demand together.
So coronary perfusion pressure for the subendocardium is essentially aortic
diastolic pressure minus ventricular end-diastolic pressure,
applied over the duration of diastole, and maintaining diastolic pressure,
controlling filling pressure and avoiding tachycardia are the levers by which we
protect coronary perfusion.
How is coronary blood flow autoregulated and matched to demand?
Coronary blood flow is regulated principally to match supply to the heart's
moment-to-moment metabolic demand, achieved through autoregulation and, dominantly,
metabolic control, with neural and endothelial influences modulating these.
Autoregulation is the capacity of the coronary bed to keep flow relatively constant
despite changes in perfusion pressure,
over a range of roughly sixty to one hundred and eighty millimetres of mercury,
by adjusting the tone of the small resistance arterioles — a myogenic and metabolic
response that constricts when pressure rises and dilates when it falls.
More important than pressure, however, is metabolic regulation:
coronary flow is exquisitely coupled to myocardial oxygen consumption,
so that when the heart works harder flow rises proportionately,
a several-fold increase being possible, termed the coronary flow reserve.
This metabolic coupling is mediated by local factors released by the working
myocardium — adenosine, produced from ATP breakdown, is a key coronary vasodilator,
together with a falling local oxygen tension, rising carbon dioxide and potassium,
and nitric oxide from the endothelium.
Because resting oxygen extraction is already near-maximal, as we shall discuss,
almost the entire increase in oxygen supply during exertion must come from
increased flow, making this metabolic vasodilatation vital.
So coronary flow is autoregulated against pressure changes but is governed above
all by metabolic demand, dilating in response to adenosine and other local
mediators when the myocardium works harder,
with a flow reserve that allows a several-fold increase — the system that keeps
oxygen supply matched to a constantly varying demand.
Tell me about myocardial oxygen extraction and supply.
Myocardial oxygen supply has a defining peculiarity:
the heart extracts oxygen from its blood more completely than almost any other
organ even at rest, which fundamentally constrains how it can increase its oxygen
supply.
At rest, the myocardium extracts some sixty to seventy-five per cent of the oxygen
delivered to it, so that coronary sinus blood is among the most desaturated in the
body, with an oxygen saturation around thirty per cent.
This near-maximal resting extraction means that,
unlike most tissues which can meet increased demand partly by extracting more
oxygen from the same flow, the heart has very little extraction reserve.
Consequently, when myocardial oxygen demand rises — with exercise,
tachycardia or increased work — almost the only way the heart can obtain more
oxygen is by increasing coronary blood flow,
through the metabolic vasodilatation just described.
Oxygen supply to the myocardium is therefore the product of coronary blood flow and
the arterial oxygen content, and because extraction is nearly maxed out,
flow is the variable that must change.
This places the entire burden of meeting rising demand on the coronary flow
reserve, and it is why any limitation of flow — a coronary stenosis, hypotension,
tachycardia shortening diastole, or anaemia and hypoxaemia reducing oxygen content
— so readily produces ischaemia.
So the myocardium extracts oxygen almost maximally at rest,
leaving little extraction reserve, so increased oxygen supply depends almost
entirely on increased coronary blood flow and on adequate arterial oxygen content —
a constraint at the heart of myocardial ischaemia.
What determines myocardial oxygen demand?
Myocardial oxygen demand is set by how hard and how often the heart contracts,
and it is conventionally attributed to three principal determinants,
all of which the anaesthetist can influence.
The first is heart rate: each contraction consumes oxygen,
so demand rises directly with rate, and rate has the added effect, already noted,
of shortening diastole and so reducing supply — a doubly adverse effect in
ischaemia.
The second is contractility, the vigour of contraction:
a more forcefully contracting myocardium,
as under sympathetic stimulation or inotropic drugs, consumes more oxygen.
The third, and quantitatively the largest, is myocardial wall tension,
which by the law of Laplace depends on the intraventricular pressure and the
ventricular radius divided by the wall thickness; thus a high afterload,
raising the pressure the ventricle must generate,
and a dilated ventricle with a large radius both greatly increase wall tension and
oxygen demand, while preload contributes through ventricular size.
Basal metabolism contributes a small fixed amount.
The clinical importance is that we manipulate every one of these:
we lower demand by controlling heart rate, for instance with beta-blockade,
by avoiding excessive inotropy, by reducing afterload,
and by avoiding ventricular distension.
So myocardial oxygen demand is determined chiefly by heart rate,
contractility and wall tension — the last set by pressure and ventricular size
through Laplace's law — and managing the ischaemic heart is largely the art of
minimising these determinants while preserving supply.
Bring supply and demand together to explain myocardial ischaemia.
Myocardial ischaemia is the consequence of an imbalance between myocardial oxygen
supply and demand, and the whole of its prevention and management follows from
understanding both sides of that balance and the factors that disturb it.
Supply, as established, depends on coronary blood flow — itself a function of
coronary perfusion pressure, the duration of diastole,
the patency of the vessels and the autoregulatory and metabolic control of tone —
and on the arterial oxygen content.
Demand depends on heart rate, contractility and wall tension.
Ischaemia occurs when demand outstrips the supply the coronary circulation can
deliver.
In the patient with coronary artery disease,
a fixed stenosis limits the maximum achievable flow and exhausts the coronary flow
reserve, so that a rise in demand, or a fall in supply,
that the normal heart would tolerate provokes ischaemia.
The subendocardium, perfused last and compressed most, suffers first.
The factors that precipitate perioperative ischaemia map directly onto the balance:
tachycardia, which raises demand and cuts diastolic supply, is the great enemy;
hypotension and especially diastolic hypotension reduce perfusion pressure;
anaemia and hypoxaemia reduce oxygen content; and ventricular distension,
hypertension and increased contractility raise demand.
So myocardial ischaemia is a supply–demand mismatch,
made likely by a flow-limiting stenosis that abolishes reserve,
and precipitated by tachycardia, hypotension, anaemia,
hypoxaemia and raised demand — which is precisely why anaesthetic management of the
at-risk heart targets each of these.
How do the autonomic nervous system and the endothelium influence coronary flow?
Although metabolic regulation dominates coronary control,
the autonomic nervous system and the endothelium exert important modulating
influences, and their effects can be both helpful and, occasionally, harmful.
The coronary vessels carry both sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation.
Sympathetic stimulation has a dual effect:
it acts directly on coronary alpha receptors to constrict,
but it simultaneously increases heart rate and contractility,
raising myocardial metabolism, and the resulting metabolic vasodilatation usually
overwhelms the direct constriction,
so the net effect of sympathetic activation is increased coronary flow to match the
increased work; beta-receptor stimulation on the vessels also dilates.
This metabolic override is why exercise increases coronary flow despite sympathetic
activity.
The endothelium is a powerful regulator, continuously releasing nitric oxide,
which dilates the coronary vessels and opposes platelet aggregation and
constriction; healthy endothelium thus promotes flow.
In coronary disease, however, endothelial dysfunction reverses this:
the diseased endothelium produces less nitric oxide,
and stimuli that should dilate, such as exercise or acetylcholine,
may instead cause paradoxical constriction,
contributing to ischaemia and to coronary spasm.
So the autonomic system modulates coronary flow,
sympathetic activation usually increasing it through metabolic override despite
direct alpha constriction, while the endothelium, through nitric oxide,
normally promotes flow — a protective mechanism lost in endothelial dysfunction,
when paradoxical constriction and spasm may occur.
What is coronary steal, and how can anaesthesia affect coronary flow distribution?
Coronary steal is the phenomenon whereby blood flow is diverted away from an
ischaemic region of myocardium towards a better-perfused region,
worsening the ischaemia, and it is relevant to the use of certain vasodilators and
to anaesthetic agents.
The mechanism depends on the state of the coronary bed.
In a heart with a severe stenosis, the vessels in the territory beyond the stenosis
are already maximally dilated by metabolic autoregulation,
struggling to maintain flow, and have exhausted their reserve.
If a drug then dilates the coronary resistance vessels generally — particularly the
small arterioles, as potent arteriolar dilators do — it dilates the healthy,
non-stenosed beds, which were not maximally dilated,
lowering their resistance and increasing their flow;
because they draw from shared supply and lower the pressure distal to the stenosis,
flow is effectively stolen from the already-maximal,
pressure-dependent ischaemic territory.
This is the theoretical concern with potent arteriolar coronary vasodilators.
Among the volatile anaesthetic agents,
isoflurane was historically suspected of causing coronary steal,
though its clinical importance is now considered minimal at usual concentrations.
More broadly, anaesthesia affects coronary flow distribution through its effects on
the determinants of supply and demand — on blood pressure, heart rate,
contractility and diastolic time.
So coronary steal is the diversion of flow from a maximally-dilated,
pressure-dependent ischaemic region to healthier territory when arteriolar dilators
are given, a theoretical hazard of potent vasodilators,
while anaesthetic agents influence coronary flow mainly through their haemodynamic
effects on supply and demand.
Summarise the anaesthetic principles for protecting the coronary circulation.
Protecting the coronary circulation in the patient at risk of myocardial ischaemia
is one of the central tasks of cardiovascular anaesthesia,
and the principles follow directly from the supply-and-demand physiology.
The overriding aim is to keep myocardial oxygen supply at least equal to demand
throughout.
On the demand side, the single most important measure is the avoidance of
tachycardia, which raises demand and shortens diastolic filling time,
so heart rate is kept controlled — ensuring adequate analgesia and depth of
anaesthesia, avoiding light anaesthesia and sympathetic stimulation,
and using beta-blockade where appropriate.
Contractility and wall tension are kept moderate by avoiding hypertension and
excessive afterload and preventing ventricular distension.
On the supply side, the aortic diastolic pressure is maintained to preserve
coronary perfusion pressure, avoiding hypotension and treating it promptly;
the arterial oxygen content is kept up by avoiding hypoxaemia and significant
anaemia; and the duration of diastole is preserved by rate control.
Anaemia is treated to maintain oxygen-carrying capacity,
and coronary perfusion is not sacrificed to other goals.
The patient's own anti-ischaemic medication, especially beta-blockers,
is generally continued.
Continuous monitoring for ischaemia, particularly with the electrocardiogram,
allows early detection and treatment.
So coronary protection is the practical application of the supply–demand balance —
above all controlling heart rate, maintaining diastolic blood pressure and oxygen
content, and avoiding the distension,
hypertension and tachycardia that tip the heart into ischaemia.
Now turn to the splanchnic circulation. Give me an overview.
The splanchnic circulation is the blood supply to the abdominal gastrointestinal
tract, the spleen, the pancreas and the liver, and it is a large,
important and clinically vulnerable regional bed with several distinctive features.
It is supplied by the three great unpaired branches of the abdominal aorta — the
coeliac trunk, the superior mesenteric and the inferior mesenteric arteries — and
it receives a substantial fraction of the cardiac output,
around a quarter to a third at rest,
reflecting the metabolic work of digestion and the liver.
Its most distinctive anatomical feature is that the venous blood from the gut,
spleen and pancreas does not return directly to the heart but is collected into the
portal vein and passed first through the liver,
so that the liver receives a dual blood supply: the portal venous blood,
rich in absorbed nutrients but partly deoxygenated,
and its own hepatic arterial supply.
The splanchnic bed is also the body's largest blood reservoir, holding a large,
variable volume that can be mobilised when needed.
And the gut mucosa, with its particular microcirculatory arrangement,
is unusually susceptible to ischaemia.
These features — the large share of cardiac output,
the portal system delivering blood to the liver, the reservoir function,
and the vulnerability to hypoperfusion — make the splanchnic circulation central to
the physiology of digestion, to the handling of blood volume,
and to the pathophysiology of shock and sepsis.
So the splanchnic circulation is the large,
reservoir-rich supply to the gut and liver,
distinguished by the portal system feeding the liver and by its vulnerability to
ischaemia in shock.
Describe the hepatic blood supply and the hepatic arterial buffer response.
The liver has a uniquely arranged dual blood supply,
and an elegant intrinsic mechanism that helps keep its total flow constant,
both of which are important to drug handling and to the liver's vulnerability in
disease.
The liver receives about a quarter of the cardiac output through two inflows.
Roughly seventy per cent comes from the portal vein,
carrying venous blood drained from the gut and spleen — nutrient-rich but already
partly deoxygenated; the remaining thirty per cent comes from the hepatic artery,
carrying fully oxygenated blood.
Because the portal blood is partly deoxygenated,
the two supplies contribute more equally to the liver's oxygen delivery,
each providing roughly half. The two inflows mix in the hepatic sinusoids and drain
through the hepatic veins to the inferior vena cava.
The distinctive regulatory mechanism is the hepatic arterial buffer response:
the hepatic artery adjusts its flow inversely to changes in portal flow,
so that when portal flow falls — for instance in hypovolaemia or when gut flow is
reduced — the hepatic artery dilates and increases its flow to buffer the change
and help maintain total hepatic perfusion and oxygen delivery;
the mechanism is mediated largely by local adenosine washout.
The portal vein, by contrast, cannot autoregulate in this way,
its flow being determined by the gut and splenic circulations upstream.
So the liver has a dual supply — about seventy per cent portal and thirty per cent
arterial, each contributing roughly half the oxygen — with the hepatic arterial
buffer response allowing the artery to compensate for falls in portal flow,
a mechanism that helps protect hepatic oxygenation.
Explain the role of the splanchnic circulation as a blood reservoir.
The splanchnic circulation is the body's most important blood reservoir,
and this capacitance function is central to the regulation of effective circulating
volume and to the response to haemorrhage.
The splanchnic veins and the venous sinusoids of the liver and spleen are highly
compliant and contain a large volume of blood — on the order of a quarter to a
third of the total blood volume — held at low pressure.
Much of this volume is, in effect, in reserve.
The splanchnic veins are richly innervated by the sympathetic nervous system,
and when sympathetic activity increases — as in haemorrhage, hypovolaemia,
exercise or stress — these veins constrict,
actively expelling a large volume of blood from the reservoir into the central
circulation, augmenting venous return and so cardiac output.
This mobilisation of splanchnic blood is one of the body's most important rapid
compensations for blood loss, capable of transferring a substantial volume to
maintain filling of the heart before any change in blood pressure is apparent.
The spleen contributes to this in some species more than in humans.
Conversely, splanchnic venodilatation,
as may occur with certain drugs or with loss of sympathetic tone,
pools blood in the reservoir and reduces venous return.
So the splanchnic bed acts as a large,
sympathetically controlled blood reservoir whose veins constrict to mobilise blood
into the central circulation in haemorrhage and stress — a key mechanism of
compensation for hypovolaemia, and one whose failure or reversal contributes to
circulatory collapse.
What is postprandial hyperaemia, and how is splanchnic flow regulated?
Splanchnic blood flow is not constant but varies greatly with the functional state
of the gut, rising markedly after a meal — postprandial hyperaemia — and it is
regulated by a combination of metabolic, neural and hormonal influences.
Postprandial hyperaemia is the substantial increase in splanchnic,
particularly intestinal, blood flow that follows the ingestion of food,
sometimes doubling mesenteric flow,
to support the increased metabolic work of digestion, absorption and secretion.
It is triggered by the presence of food in the gut and is mediated by local
metabolic vasodilatation, by gastrointestinal hormones such as those released
during digestion, and by absorbed nutrients.
The general regulation of splanchnic flow reflects several influences.
There is a degree of autoregulation,
the gut maintaining flow against modest changes in perfusion pressure,
and metabolic regulation matching flow to local activity.
Overlying this is powerful sympathetic control:
the splanchnic resistance vessels constrict under sympathetic activation,
reducing flow, while the capacitance vessels constrict to mobilise the reservoir —
so that in stress, exercise or haemorrhage the splanchnic circulation is among the
first to be sacrificed, its flow diverted to more vital organs.
Hormones such as angiotensin and vasopressin also constrict the bed.
So splanchnic flow rises after meals as postprandial hyperaemia to serve digestion,
and is regulated by autoregulation and metabolic coupling but, importantly,
is strongly subject to sympathetic and hormonal vasoconstriction,
which sacrifices gut flow in stress and shock.
Why is the intestinal mucosa especially vulnerable to ischaemia?
The intestinal mucosa is one of the tissues most vulnerable to ischaemia in the
body, a vulnerability that arises from the particular arrangement of its
microcirculation and that has major clinical consequences in shock and critical
illness.
Within each intestinal villus, the small artery runs up the centre to the tip,
and the veins run down close beside it,
so that arterial and venous blood flow in opposite directions in intimate proximity
— a countercurrent arrangement.
Oxygen can diffuse directly from the incoming arterial vessel across to the
outgoing venous vessel, short-circuiting the tip of the villus,
so that under normal conditions the oxygen tension at the villus tip is already
lower than in the rest of the mucosa.
When blood flow falls — in hypovolaemia,
hypotension or sympathetic vasoconstriction — this countercurrent oxygen shunting
is exaggerated, and the villus tip, already marginally oxygenated,
becomes frankly ischaemic first.
Because the splanchnic bed is also preferentially vasoconstricted and sacrificed
early in shock, the gut mucosa suffers disproportionately and early,
often before global signs of hypoperfusion are obvious.
Mucosal ischaemia damages the gut barrier,
allowing bacteria and endotoxin to translocate,
and is implicated in the genesis and perpetuation of multi-organ dysfunction.
So the intestinal mucosa is especially ischaemia-prone because of the
countercurrent microcirculation of the villus,
which shunts oxygen and leaves the tip marginally oxygenated,
combined with the early sympathetic sacrifice of splanchnic flow in shock — a
vulnerability central to gut-barrier failure and multi-organ dysfunction.
How does the splanchnic circulation behave in haemorrhage and shock?
The splanchnic circulation occupies a pivotal and somewhat paradoxical position in
the response to haemorrhage and shock,
serving first as a source of compensation and then becoming a victim and a driver
of deterioration.
In the early response to blood loss, the splanchnic bed is a great asset:
intense sympathetic activation constricts the splanchnic capacitance veins to
mobilise the large reservoir of blood into the central circulation,
supporting venous return and cardiac output,
while constriction of the splanchnic resistance vessels diverts arterial flow away
from the gut towards the heart and brain,
helping to defend perfusion of those vital organs.
This sacrifice of the gut is teleologically sensible in the short term.
However, if shock is severe or prolonged,
this same vasoconstriction becomes harmful:
the sustained reduction in gut and hepatic flow causes mucosal ischaemia,
exploiting the villous vulnerability just described,
damaging the gut barrier and impairing hepatic function.
The ischaemic gut releases inflammatory mediators and permits bacterial and
endotoxin translocation, and the splanchnic bed becomes a motor of the systemic
inflammatory response and of multi-organ dysfunction.
On reperfusion, further injury occurs.
Thus splanchnic hypoperfusion may persist even after global haemodynamics are
restored.
So in haemorrhage the splanchnic bed first compensates by mobilising its reservoir
and diverting flow to vital organs,
but with severe or prolonged shock this sacrifice causes gut mucosal ischaemia,
barrier failure and translocation, making the splanchnic circulation a driver of
the systemic inflammation and multi-organ failure that follow.
What happens to the splanchnic circulation in sepsis?
In sepsis the splanchnic circulation is profoundly disturbed,
and the gut has been called both a victim and a motor of the septic process,
making splanchnic perfusion an important and difficult concern in the critically
ill. The deranged physiology has several elements.
The systemic vasodilatation and distributive shock of sepsis alter the distribution
of flow, and although total splanchnic flow may even be normal or increased,
the regional and microcirculatory distribution within the gut and liver is
disrupted, with maldistribution and shunting leaving areas of mucosa ischaemic
despite apparently adequate global flow.
Metabolic demand rises while oxygen extraction and utilisation are impaired by the
mitochondrial dysfunction of sepsis.
The gut mucosal barrier is damaged,
and increased permeability permits translocation of bacteria and endotoxin from the
gut lumen, which may amplify the inflammatory response and perpetuate sepsis —
though the precise role of translocation in humans remains debated.
Hepatic function is impaired, affecting clearance and synthesis.
Vasopressors used to restore systemic pressure may further compromise splanchnic
and especially mucosal flow if they cause excessive regional vasoconstriction,
so the choice and dose of vasopressor have splanchnic consequences.
So in sepsis the splanchnic circulation suffers microcirculatory maldistribution
and mucosal ischaemia despite possibly normal global flow,
with barrier failure and translocation amplifying the inflammatory process and the
gut acting as a motor of multi-organ dysfunction,
while vasopressor therapy must balance systemic pressure against regional perfusion.
How do anaesthesia and vasoactive drugs affect the splanchnic circulation?
Anaesthesia and the vasoactive drugs we use have significant effects on the
splanchnic circulation, which matter because of the bed's vulnerability and its
role in outcome, particularly in major surgery and critical illness.
General anaesthesia tends to reduce splanchnic blood flow,
partly through reductions in cardiac output and perfusion pressure and partly
through direct vascular effects, the magnitude depending on the agents and on the
maintenance of systemic haemodynamics; positive-pressure ventilation,
by raising intrathoracic pressure and reducing venous return,
can further reduce splanchnic flow and impede hepatic venous drainage.
Neuraxial anaesthesia, by blocking sympathetic tone, has complex effects,
potentially increasing splanchnic flow by vasodilatation but reducing it if it
causes hypotension.
Among vasopressors, the effects on the splanchnic bed differ:
agents that restore perfusion pressure may improve gut flow if global haemodynamics
were the limiting factor, but potent vasoconstrictors can reduce mucosal flow
disproportionately; the relative splanchnic effects of noradrenaline,
vasopressin and others are an area of clinical attention.
Maintaining adequate cardiac output, perfusion pressure and oxygen delivery,
and avoiding unnecessary hypovolaemia and excessive vasoconstriction,
are the practical means of protecting splanchnic perfusion.
Goal-directed fluid therapy aims partly at preserving gut perfusion.
So anaesthesia and positive-pressure ventilation generally reduce splanchnic flow,
vasopressors have variable and sometimes adverse mucosal effects,
and protecting the splanchnic circulation rests on maintaining cardiac output,
perfusion pressure and oxygen delivery while avoiding hypovolaemia and excessive
vasoconstriction.
Compare and contrast the coronary and splanchnic circulations,
and place them among the regional circulations.
Comparing the coronary and splanchnic circulations brings out how each regional bed
is specialised to its organ's needs,
and contrasting them with the cerebral and renal beds completes the picture of
regional control.
Both the coronary and splanchnic beds receive a large share of cardiac output and
both are clinically vulnerable, but they differ in almost every other respect.
The coronary circulation is tightly and predominantly metabolically regulated,
with near-maximal resting oxygen extraction and little extraction reserve,
so that it must increase flow to meet demand and cannot be sacrificed;
its flow is phasic and largely diastolic, and it is fiercely protected.
The splanchnic circulation, by contrast, has substantial reserve,
is a large blood reservoir, and is preferentially sacrificed under sympathetic
activation, its flow diverted to defend the heart and brain in stress and shock.
Thus the coronary bed is a protected, demand-following circulation,
while the splanchnic bed is an expendable, reservoir circulation.
Set among the others: the cerebral circulation, like the coronary, is vital,
tightly autoregulated and protected, sensitive to carbon dioxide;
the renal circulation is autoregulated and receives a high flow far in excess of
its metabolic needs, serving filtration.
The skin and muscle beds, like the splanchnic, are sacrificed in shock.
So the coronary and splanchnic circulations exemplify the two poles of regional
design — the protected, demand-coupled,
reserve-less coronary bed and the expendable,
reservoir splanchnic bed — and each regional circulation's behaviour reflects the
priority of its organ in the hierarchy of perfusion.
Finally, draw together the anaesthetic relevance of these regional circulations.
Drawing the station together, the coronary and splanchnic circulations are two
regional beds whose specialised physiology directly shapes anaesthetic management,
and the unifying lesson is that each organ's blood supply has its own rules of
supply, regulation and vulnerability that we must respect.
For the coronary circulation, the governing principle is the supply–demand balance:
supply is largely diastolic, depends on aortic diastolic pressure minus ventricular
filling pressure over the duration of diastole,
and is limited by near-maximal oxygen extraction; demand is set by heart rate,
contractility and wall tension.
From this flows the whole of coronary protection — above all avoiding tachycardia,
maintaining diastolic pressure and oxygen content,
and limiting demand — to prevent the ischaemia that threatens the patient with
coronary disease.
For the splanchnic circulation, the lessons are its role as a sympathetically
controlled blood reservoir that compensates for haemorrhage,
the extreme vulnerability of the gut mucosa to ischaemia through its countercurrent
microcirculation, its early sacrifice in shock,
and its role as victim and motor of multi-organ dysfunction in severe shock and
sepsis — so that maintaining cardiac output,
perfusion pressure and oxygen delivery and avoiding excessive vasoconstriction
protect it.
Both illustrate that regional perfusion can be deranged even when global
haemodynamics look adequate.
So understanding these regional circulations lets us protect the heart from
ischaemia and the gut from hypoperfusion — two of the most consequential goals in
anaesthesia and critical care.
What is the coronary collateral circulation?
The coronary collateral circulation is a network of small anastomotic vessels
interconnecting the coronary arterial branches,
which can enlarge over time to provide an alternative route of blood supply to
myocardium whose primary artery becomes narrowed or occluded,
and it is an important determinant of how a patient tolerates coronary disease.
In the normal human heart these collateral connections are small and carry little
flow, the coronary arteries behaving largely as functional end-arteries,
which is why an abrupt occlusion, as in acute myocardial infarction,
causes infarction of the territory beyond it.
However, when a coronary artery narrows gradually over months or years,
the pressure gradient across the pre-existing collateral channels drives flow
through them, and they progressively enlarge and remodel into functional collateral
vessels capable of carrying substantial flow to the threatened territory.
A patient with well-developed collaterals may tolerate a severe stenosis or even a
complete occlusion with little or no infarction,
the collateral supply maintaining viability,
whereas a patient without them suffers a large infarct from the same lesion.
This explains why chronic, slowly progressive disease may be better tolerated than
an acute event, and why the extent of collateralisation influences the consequences
of coronary occlusion.
So the coronary collateral circulation is a normally sparse anastomotic network
that enlarges in response to chronic arterial narrowing to provide alternative
perfusion, and its degree of development is a key factor in how well myocardium
survives coronary stenosis or occlusion.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Left ventricular coronary flow is predominantly diastolic because systolic
compression throttles the intramural vessels;
subendocardial perfusion pressure is approximately aortic diastolic pressure minus
ventricular end-diastolic pressure,
applied over the duration of diastole - so tachycardia is doubly dangerous.
2. The myocardium extracts oxygen near-maximally at rest,
leaving little extraction reserve, so increased supply depends almost entirely on
increased coronary flow (metabolic vasodilatation via adenosine);
demand is set by heart rate, contractility and wall tension (Laplace).
Second, Coronary protection is the supply-demand balance in practice:
above all avoid tachycardia, maintain diastolic blood pressure and arterial oxygen
content, and limit wall tension, contractility and ventricular distension.
Third, The splanchnic bed is the body's largest blood reservoir (a quarter to a
third of blood volume), sympathetically mobilised to compensate for haemorrhage,
and the liver has a dual supply (about 70% portal, 30% arterial,
roughly half the oxygen each) with the hepatic arterial buffer response.
Fourth, The gut mucosa is exquisitely ischaemia-prone (villous countercurrent
oxygen shunting plus early sympathetic sacrifice in shock),
causing barrier failure, translocation and multi-organ dysfunction;
protect it by maintaining cardiac output,
perfusion pressure and oxygen delivery and avoiding excessive vasoconstriction.
Thank you. That concludes the station.